## One Country, Three Systems: State-Society Relations in Post-Jiang China

_Richard Madsen_

In the past decade, China's social development has been highly uneven and full of paradoxes. On the one hand, rapid economic growth has created a burgeoning urban middle class, whose members enjoy a comfortable prosperity (xiao kang) and greater levels of personal freedom than ever before in Chinese history. Central to this freedom are the abilities to choose one's occupation, to move between jobs, and even to start up one's own business. Members of this new middle class can take for granted the basic necessities of life, such as adequate food, clothing, and housing, and they busy themselves with working out a sense of individual identity by making personal choices among the wide variety of status symbols provided by a consumer society. Often the goods with the highest status are precisely those that are part of a global system of brand names, most of which are of U.S. provenances, such as Starbucks coffee, Nike shoes and McDonald’s hamburgers. It is tempting to conclude that this new middle class -- increasingly working in gleaming modernist office buildings, restlessly seeking new ways to make money and acquire status by wearing the latest fashions and developing cosmopolitan tastes in food and drink -- is embracing the "American way of life."

The temptation, however, should be resisted. Although the aspirations of China's new middle class are indeed reflective of U.S. free market ideology, individualism, and consumerism, these aspirations in China are expressed in a very different context. In the United States, the "American way of life" permeates almost the entire society and is sustained by almost all social institutions. In China, it can be realized only among a middle class of managers, professionals, and successful entrepreneurs that constitutes less than 10 percent of the population. By anyone's standards, this is a sizable group—perhaps 100 million people—but it floats in a sea of 1.3 billion people, many of whom are poor (if not in an absolute sense, at least in terms of their rising expectations about what constitutes a decent life) and insecure. Moreover, middle-class aspirations toward individual freedom and personal fulfillment grow incongruent with many of the institutions that dominate Chinese life, including the autocratic Communist Party, a residential permit system that restricts geographical mobility, state-owned enterprises that still employ about 40 percent of the urban workforce, and extended families and corporate lineages that structure much of rural life.

Under these circumstances, increasing economic growth can lead not to broadly shared prosperity but to intensified social conflicts. And the modernization of some sectors of society (defined here in terms of increased opportunities toward private personal autonomy coupled with public regulation by universalistic rules) contrasts with new forms of traditionalism (defined here in terms of subordination of the individual to corporate groups governed through informal, particularistic relationships) in other sectors. The air-conditioned world of McDonald's and Starbucks coexists with the gritty environments of laid-off workers, migrant laborers, and underemployed farmers. The values of individual enterprise and fair play coexist with many kinds of corruption and political manipulation.

This chapter presents an overview of Chinese society in transition under the leadership of the "fourth generation." It is a picture of a weakly united whole bound together through codependent relationships in a fragile equilibrium. To make sense of the contrasts and paradoxes of contemporary Chinese society, I will argue that it is useful to think of Chinese society as consisting of several incompatible social systems, each with a distinctive internal stratification system, a distinctive pattern of life courses, and a distinctive set of cultural understandings about the proper relationship between self and society. Although by no means completely compatible, the different components of each system have a mutual synergy that contrasts with their more tension-filled relationship with other systems. They gain enough superficial, short-term benefits from one another that they avoid confronting their fundamental long-term incompatibility.

We can call the systems "third-world China", "socialist China", and "newly industrializing China." The systems are ideal types and nowhere to correspond perfectly to empirical reality. They predominate in geographical regions. Third-world China most aptly describes the inland areas of central and western China—mostly rural, based on family-labor agriculture, and in some places riven by ethnic and religious conflict. Socialist China most aptly describes the industrial northeast, still dominated by the legacy of large state-owned enterprises. The coastal areas of China, with their dynamic, export-oriented economic growth, most clearly fit the description of a newly industrializing economy. However, the systems are not neatly distinguishable by geography. For example, even in the coastal areas of China, one can find some of the social patterns that characterize third-world China and socialist China.

Relationships between the systems are mediated by actors such as corrupt officials, migrant laborers, and diversifying families. The ability of some people to move between these systems, I will argue, has helped to diffuse social conflict, but the overall relationship between the systems is inherently unstable. I will first present an account of each of the three systems and then discuss the terms of their uneasy relationships with one another. Finally, I will discuss the implications of the resultant uneasy balance between contradictory forces for social stability and the transformation of political institutions.

### Third-World China

In Third-World China, social status is heavily dependent on one’s position in political and corporate lineages. Although the acquisition of political power is dependent on formal approval by the Party and state bureaucracies, the actual practice of power is so dependent on informal, personal ties to kin and community that many leaders can be "local emperors” who are beyond effective control by the state. A successful life course in this kind of social system begins and ends with dependence on a male-dominated family. A comfortable and honorable old age, in particular, depends on being taken care of by one’s adult sons and their wives. The system is justified by cultural values stressing the centrality of family, the importance of maintaining an orderly hierarchy of family authority, and the mutual obligations of family members toward one another.

This system fits well with the requirements of small-scale, labor-intensive farming. In China, about 70 percent of the population -- about 800 million people -- resides in villages, and most of them make a living by farming. The typical farm consists of a single household that has responsibility for cultivating about one mu (1/15th of a hectare) of land. The household consumes about two-thirds of what it produces and sells the rest in a market that is highly regulated by the state. A household typically consists of a husband and wife, their children, and the parents of the husband. Often the family lives in proximity to other families who share a common ancestor through the male line. The bonds of kinship entail important moral claims that facilitate cooperation among the related families while encouraging them to see their interests as separate from nonrelated families. Women in this system are to some degree perpetual outsides. They marry into their husband’s family and lineage and have as their primary responsibility the carrying on of that lineage by producing male children. It is male children, committed to staying in their natal villages, whom parents have to rely upon to provide care in their old age. Such arrangements are broadly similar to those found in most agrarian societies.

Although this system is not a straightforward continuation of “traditional” Chinese society—pre-modern society was far too diverse and changeable to constitute a fixed “tradition”—certain elements of the present-day rural system undoubtedly resonate with longstanding cultural practices. The system predominates today, not simply because of historical inertia but because of specific institutional arrangements imposed by the governments of the People’s Republic of China. The Maoist regime was ideologically opposed to the “feudal” practices of the traditional Chinese family and it suppressed many traditional family rituals. However, many of the Maoist organizational arrangements actually helped to preserve some basic features of such family life. The people’s commune system effectively confined farmers to agricultural work and made it almost impossible for them to move from their natal communities. Social security was almost entirely based on the mutual support of family members. The most pitiable residents of any village were invariably those who had to depend on meager government handouts in their old age because they had no living family members nearby. Even when the Maoist regime crushed the traditional local elites, they reinforced the system of cultural categories on which traditional elite rule had been based. By giving the deposed “gentry” — landlords and rich peasants — an official bad class label and making it inheritable through the male line, the Maoists affirmed the continuing importance of kinship and the existence of a fixed hierarchy of political status.

Under Deng Xiaoping's reforms, the people’s communes were dismantled in the early 1980s。 Farmers now had much more flexibility about how they were to manage their agricultural production and many more opportunities to move around in search of non-agricultural work, and they were subject to much less ideological pressure. But the new institutional arrangements have preserved the most important features of the family-based agrarian political economy. The current system replaces collective ownership with a “household responsibility system,” under which each household is given long-term use of a small piece of land, but is not allowed to sell the land or put it to nonfarming use. This system of small-scale farming reinforces the familistic social system described above. Meanwhile, in the absence of ideologically driven attempts to eliminate traditional family customs, such customs as elaborate marriage and funeral rituals have had a revival.

Moreover, the “household registration system” further reinforced the commitment of farmers to their villages and their patriarchal corporate families. Under this system, it is impossible for a farmer to become an urban resident. As we shall see, a great many farmers have, in fact, migrated to cities, but they live and work there as sojourners, as undocumented aliens, without any rights to state-subsidized health care, education for their children, or retirement pensions. If they are to get such social welfare benefits at all, they have to return to their villages.

With no change on the horizon in either the household responsibility system or the household registration system, farmers have to orient their lives, as they have done for centuries, around maintaining strong families embedded in kinship networks. Therefore, even as China rapidly modernizes, as the Chinese scholar Cao Jinging argues in an important recent book, there remains an important degree of continuity with the rural social system that flourished in late imperial China.

There has been a change. But the most recent changes have intensified some of the most problematic aspects of the late imperial system rather than transcending the system. In the late imperial system, one became wealthy not by becoming a more efficient farmer but by obtaining a Confucian education and gaining political access to the state. Having achieved such access, one could gain considerable wealth by demanding favors from ordinary farmers in return for paternalistic protecting some of their interests. When the Confucian ethic was strong, there might be some genuine reciprocity between the local "gentry" and ordinary farmers, especially those connected through extended kinship with the local elite. By the end of the imperial era, however, the relationship had often become harshly exploitative and during the revolution, Communist organizers could mobilize farmers against the "evil gentry".

During the 1990s, many of the old exploitative patterns began to return with a vengeance, a result of the resurgence of aspects of traditional culture within a tightening rural economy. At the beginning of the household responsibility system in the early 1980s, there was a rapid increase in agricultural productivity. The quality of food and housing improved. The number of people living in what the United Nations would define as absolute poverty shrank to less than 10 percent of the population. But the rise in living standards raised expectations. And the spread of mass communications (about 80 percent of farm households now have televisions) made farmers ever more aware of widening gaps between the countryside and the city. Then, even as the overall Chinese economy began to grow at a spectacularly rapid rate in the mid-1990s, farmers’ incomes began to plummet, a victim of declining prices for grain (kept low by the government's desire to stave off urban unrest) and rising prices for farm tools and fertilizer. Meanwhile, the costs of medical care and education have risen beyond the capacity of many farmers to pay for them.

There is no way to improve the efficiency of farming without consolidating smallholdings into larger enterprises, an option precluded by the household responsibility system. Another hope for increasing farmers' income has been township and village enterprises (TVEs). These are local factories that can take advantage of cheap surplus labor. The TVEs are usually owned as joint stock companies by an entire community, but their profits often go mainly to the community’s officials. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, they often produced enough income to offset diminishing returns to agriculture. But TVEs that are located far from city suburbs and lack adequate transportation infrastructure and managerial expertise have had a difficult time being profitable. In the late 1990s, most of them collapsed, leaving villages with debts and broken dreams.

Under these circumstances, the most promising path to acquiring wealth for many farmers has seemed to be a traditional one—becoming an official and/or getting one's children an official post. The end of the old collective farming system was supposed to achieve some efficiency by shrinking the size of local government, and initially, it did. But in the 1990s, the size of government at the township and village level expanded over 400 percent. The salaries of these officials came from escalating fees imposed on local people for services of dubious value. In his book "China Along the Yellow River," Yuan Ming cites some examples from extensive interviews he conducted in Henan Province. One town had 20 government officials when it was organized as a people’s commune in the 1970s. Now there are 150, about three-quarters of whom are probably superfluous. The local government sections that increased the most were those that brought in income from fines and taxes, such as family planning and public security.

In rural backwaters where “the heavens are high and the emperor far away,” local officials, dependent more on local fees than a bureaucratic salary, not only ignore central government policies but sometimes turn them into their opposite. An example of such a perverse effect is the way the central government's family planning program has been implemented. To keep farmers from having more than one child (or two children if the first one was a girl), the family planning officials impose heavy fines, which many households are willing to pay because of the importance of having sons who will bear responsibility for taking care of the parents in old age. But since the local family planning officials depend on the fines (and probably bribes) for their income, they actually encourage the local farmers to have more children than the law allows.

Within the past few years, the combination of a tightening rural economy and parasitic, exploitative officials has begun to reach a crisis point. In an angry letter published in the journal Nanfang Zhoumo (Southern Weekend) in August 2000, an honest local official complains that for some farmers net income has actually declined to below zero, because they cannot raise enough cash to pay their taxes and fees. The consequence has been widespread protests and sometimes rioting. According to an article in the South China Post, there were more than 2,000 “riots and other violent demonstrations against rural authorities” in 1999 alone. And if anything, the numbers seem to have been increasing since then. Finally, in January 2002, an editorial in the People's Daily acknowledged that rural discontent was a serious threat to national stability and called for the government "to give more and take less from farmers, provide more services and less interference, and avoid harming farmers’ feelings and interests."

To carry out this kind of reform, however, central officials would have to gain firmer control over local officials. One way to facilitate reform of local governance has been to institute elections for village officials. Begun in 1999, such experiments in grassroots democracy have spread widely across China. But the village officials up for election are not those with much real power over farmers’ lives. Elected village officials who have dared to protest corruption and mismanagement of officials above them have sometimes been beaten or jailed. Serious reform would require free elections for officials at the township and county levels of government. As yet, however, the government has not shown interest in this move, perhaps because it needs to retain the minimal allegiance of most township and county officials in order to keep the lid on popular discontent, even as their behavior worsening such discontent.

Like a Third World colonial or neocolonial government unable to alleviate the sources of popular discontent, the current government can only maintain rural stability by keeping discontent fragmented. A major source of fragmentation is the particularism of a social system based on family relationships. In his study of Henan villages, Cao Jinqing notes that the importance of family and lineage power has increased since the economic reforms, with the consequence that mutual aid among villagers almost never goes beyond extended lineage groups. It is difficult for peasants to organize themselves on the basis of general, collective interests. Beyond the boundaries of family and clan, they “do not think about representing their own interests but look to someone else to represent their interests.” 

As a consequence, although there have been thousands of local rural protests, these show no sign of linking up into widespread social movements. One way that such linkage might occur is through coalescence around ethnic or religious identities. Thus, angry Muslims (Hui) came together over considerable distances to protest an ethnic provocation in Shandong Province in fall 2000. Similarly, thousands of mostly rural underground Catholics have protested government desecration of a pilgrimage site in Hebei. The government devotes a disproportionate amount of energy to suppress such forces for rural solidarity. Another more modern practice that might contribute to such solidarity would be participation in democratic political campaigns for officials at levels higher than the villages. It is not surprising that the government shows little interest in this. The government seems to be following the old adage that the effective rule depends less on making the citizens love the government than on making sure that they do not love each other.

Theoretically, there could be two kinds of radical solutions to farmers' discontent. One would be a return to Maoist-style socialism—redistribution of some urban resources to the rural sector, while maintaining restrictions on urban mobility from the countryside to the city. There is a surprising amount of support for this among farmers. Cao Jingqing, among other recent authors, notes that rural people continue to see Mao Zedong as their savior. And when Gao Yijie, the doctor who has recently done much to expose the AIDS epidemic among villagers who have tried to supplement their incomes by selling their blood, visited a neglected, AIDS-stricken village in Henan (over the objections of local Party officials), a grateful recipient said, "I thank the Communist Party and I thank Chairman Mao."

But there is virtually no support for Maoist socialism among national leaders. The alternative that is getting considerable support is a more radical liberalism. The well-connected sociologist Lu Xueyi writes:

 "We need to create a unified market of one billion people. We can no longer continue with two divided markets in the city and the countryside and continue to lock peasants out of the cities... Reform the present household registration system, open to the doors to the cities and townships so as to open up peasant employment will need a set of laws and policies to put it into effect and would need to be implemented gradually. But making this change cannot be put off any longer. Maintaining the separation of the city and the countryside is unworkable.
 
If farmers gained full property rights over their land and full residential mobility rights, they could liberate themselves from the traditional constraints of a peasant economy. They could make fuller, more efficient use of their labor power and they could pursue those fluid and voluntary relationships that are fundamental to modern civil society.

But there remain fundamental obstacles to this liberal solution for eliminating the barriers between city and countryside. There are practical difficulties in establishing a single, unified market-based system in the Chinese hinterlands that lack adequate transportation and whose inhabitants lack the education necessary to make a transition to urban life. And there is a basic political difficulty. The influx of large numbers of farmers with citizenship rights would be threatening to urban workers, who depend on cheap grain and are already angry about massive layoffs as demonstrated by the Tiananmen movements of 1989, urban discontent has more potential than farmer discontent to coalesce into mass movements that could threaten the present regime. For the near future at least, a complete elimination of the barriers between city and countryside will probably be resisted by pragmatic, self-interested national leaders. 

It may also be resisted for reasons of pure power politics. The logic of the present-day Chinese system is that the powerful make the weak bear the costs of economic development. Because they are disorganized, have few material resources, and have no effective representation at the national level, farmers have borne a disproportionate share of the costs. The barriers separating city from countryside help consolidate the power of local rural officials as well as protect the power of urban officials, thereby ensuring that most of the costs of development will be borne by those at the bottom of each sector. But before we fully show this work, we need to more completely describe socialist China and its industrializing phase.

### Socialist China

In socialist China, social status has been dependent on rank within bureaucratic hierarchies. Power is acquired by being sponsored by superiors within the Communist Party. A satisfactory life course depends on joining a satisfactory “work unit,” moving up its bureaucratic ranks, and finally retiring on a pension provided by the work unit. The system is justified by what Andrew Walder has called “neo-traditionalism,” a system of organized dependency under political paternalism. The basis of this social system has been the state-owned enterprises that were the foundation of the redistributionist, centrally planned socialist economy.

State-owned enterprises still employ about 40 percent of the Chinese urban workforce. The system, however, is now in crisis. Although state-owned enterprises are no longer micromanaged by central planning agencies, they are financed by loans through government banks that allocate money on the basis of political connections rather than economic efficiency. Having operated for years without pressure to turn a profit, many of these enterprises are unable to pay back their loans that the Chinese banking system is probably technically bankrupt.

Most of the state-owned enterprises today are inefficient because they are bloated with workers. Although employing 40 percent of the urban workforce, they only produce less than 30 percent of the industrial output. Under state socialism, full employment has been important because the state-owned enterprise has been responsible for the full range of welfare benefits: housing, schooling, medical care, and pensions. In return for loyalty to the enterprises and to the political system that sustained them, workers were promised security.

But the enterprises can no longer keep this promise. They can no longer afford to pay for a full range of welfare benefits. Workers have to pay an ever larger deductible for medical care, for example, and pension benefits are now not enough to sustain a comfortable retirement. Yet for most workers there is no social security system that could provide affordable welfare benefits outside the “work units” that have employed them.

To improve their efficiency, state-owned enterprises have been shedding workers. The process is usually called xiagang, or "stepping down." Workers lose most of their salary but are usually not evicted from the virtually free housing provided by the enterprise and they retain some access to medical benefits. Perhaps 45 million to 60 million urban workers have been laid off in this manner, and more will surely follow as China encounters the international market pressures brought to bear by membership in the World Trade Organization. Many other state-owned enterprises are being closed altogether or sold to private investors, sometimes in joint ventures with multinational corporations. When this happens, retired or redundant workers often lose all pension and welfare benefits.

In the early 1990s, many younger, entrepreneurial workers quit their jobs and, as the saying went, “entered society” or “jumped into the sea” of free enterprise in the market economy. A “jumping into the sea fever” developed, based on the perception of abundant new opportunities in the private sector. By the mid-1990s, however, for many the opportunities have been an illusion. Most middle-aged workers (age 35 and above) found it impossible to find new jobs in the private sector, at least at the levels of income and benefits to which they had become accustomed. And retired workers have, at present, no replacement for the pensions lost when their former employers become privatized.

With no exit from the state socialist system possible, unemployed workers are increasingly voicing their anger in public protests. There have been thousands of strikes and demonstrations, sometimes violent, throughout the old industrial areas of China since the mid-1990s. In 2001 and 2002, the protests seemed to be larger and somewhat more violent. In March 2002, for example, 50,000 workers staged several weeks of protests at the oil-production complex of Daqing in Heilongjiang Province -- an enterprise hailed during the Maoist era as one of the heroic triumphs of Chinese socialism. The protests had to be brought under control by the People's Armed Police, China’s paramilitary force for maintaining public order. In this, as in other such protests, the workers’ anger was ignited by the failure of the state-owned enterprise to maintain appropriate medical and pension benefits for laid-off employees. Locked in a classic socialist system, the worker have not so much been demanding the end of socialism as they have been demanding that the system live up to its promise that it would provide them a decent level of social security in return for their loyalty.

Although it is obviously declining, the state socialist system is not smoothly dissolving into a market economy. It is imploding and crushing the hopes of many of those caught up in it. The final result could be larger explosion of anger.

### Newly Industrializing China

The source of China's current economic dynamism is its market-driven, export-oriented manufacturing system. In this system, status is based on money (and displayed through conspicuous consumption). Power depends on personal connections with bureaucrats (bought with money), but not on adherence to bureaucratic rules. A successful life course depends on getting enough money to take care of oneself. All of this is justified by a social Darwinist ideology of progress through competition. "Life is an ocean," as Karl Marx is reported to have said in an out-of-context quote in a Chinese tabloid, and "only those with a strong will can reach the other side."

Newly industrializing China is a social, political, economic, and cultural system that generally follows the development model of Asian newly industrializing economies such as Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, and Singapore. It is a model that uses the state to mobilize national labor and capital for manufacturing goods for export to the global consumer market -- the center of which, of course, is the United States. As with other newly industrializing economies in the early stages of their development, the Chinese approach concentrates on using cheap labor to produce light industry products.

At present, much of Chinese export production comes from small factories in places like Shenzhen and Dongguan in Guangdong Province and Xiamen in Fujian Province, where mostly young women turn out textiles, toys, and consumer electronics for less than ten cents per hour. But the sweatshops are giving way to higher-tech factories in places like Shanghai and Tianjin, where workers produce relatively advanced computer chips, mobile phones, and pharmaceuticals. The factories also employ white-collar workers for managing, accounting, and promotion. Much of China's emerging middle class comes from this stratum. 

Much of the capital and technology for these factories come from abroad, and the products often end up being sold under the brand names of U.S., Japanese, South Korean, or Taiwanese companies. Capital flows in search of labor that is (1) relatively cheap for the amount of skill it requires (2) flexible (i.e., it can be easily hired, fired, and moved around to suit the flexible demands of market-driven production). These economic requirements entail different kinds of social relations than are found in third-world China, with its farmers entangled in a web of kinship obligations, and in socialist China, with its organized dependence of workers on a managerial and political hierarchy. In areas where the newly industrializing economy is prevalent, the social milieu consists of loosely connected individuals. Orders is maintained through authoritarian politics focused on keeping workers docile while allowing almost libertarian freedom to owners and managers. There is immediate police response at any sign of labor unrest, but little enforcement of worker safety or environmental protection regulations (where these exist at all). 

Such labor regimes were common in the early phases of many East Asian newly industrializing economies. However, there are important differences between China and the others. The latter were committed to steadily upgrading the quality of their national labor forces through education so that they could produce more technology-intensive, value-added products. Thus, even if workers were suffering under harsh conditions, they could look forward to a better life for their children. But although the Chinese government wants to follow the lead of other newly industrializing economies in developing an economy based on high-tech production, it is not providing high-quality education for the children of most workers. Indeed, since most workers in the export-processing factories come from the countryside where schools have been steadily deteriorating, they might realistically expect that their children will get less education than they did. And when low-tech, semi-skilled jobs are replaced with high-tech, high-skill occupations, the undereducated children of today’s sweatshop workers may not qualify for the new jobs. Workers in the emerging Chinese high-tech industries will probably come from different labor pools, -- from graduates of schools in big cities or students returning from abroad.

Another difference between the China development model and other East Asian newly industrializing economies is that the others usually were committed to industrial planning through which the government encouraged development of emerging new industries through strategic channeling of investment funds into research and development. The Chinese newly industrializing model is much more laissez faire. In comparison with earlier phase of industrial development in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore, there is a freewheeling, chaotic character to Chinese development.

To understand how newly industrializing China has been so successful as well as to discern its potential failures, we now have to look at the relationships between newly industrializing China, socialist China and third-world China.

### Crossing Boundaries

The three institutionally and culturally incompatible social systems are interconnected through personal networks. The networks provide pathways through which certain groups of people can cross the boundaries between different systems. The people carry with them important resources, mainly labor power and capital. Although the flow is not completely one way, most of the resources go into newly industrializing China. From socialist China it draws capital, and from third-world China, labor. The transfer is not carried out by any institutionalized, publicly legitimated process, but through individuals with the power to act independently of either modern law or traditional morality.

Thus, much of the startup capital for private industry in newly industrializing China has been appropriated by private individuals from the public property of state-owned enterprises -- in a word, through corruption. But the term "corruption" is too broad to help us discern the many different ways in which this primitive capital accumulation takes place and to distinguish between the different degrees of harm and benefit brought about these practices. Sociologists Ding Xueliang and He Qinglian have described in vivid detail the various methods -- some very ingenious -- in which private appropriation of public goods takes place. For example, the manager of a money-losing state-owned factory might form a private company that utilizes all of the best machinery and most skilled workers of the state-owned factory, and thus earns handsome profits in the market economy, some of which can be used to finance even further improvement in the private company. Meanwhile, the state-owned factory sinks deeper into debt and goes bankrupt. This and other schemes have a number of features in common: a manager who owes authority only to higher-level officials rather than to subordinate employees; high-level officials who enforce their authority not through formal rules but through personal, clientalistic relationships with subordinates; and unclear regulations for separating public and private interests. Some of these schemes amount to nothing less than, in the confession of one businessman who profited from them, "sucking the nation's blood." But others, as suggested in the example cited here, might actually aid China's development by converting public assets to efficient use -- and in a quicker, more effective way than if done through formal, bureaucratically approved procedures. Chinese economic development, however, is development of newly industrializing China, and it does not benefit workers who are unable to leave socialist China.

Although bureaucrats-turned-entrepreneurs can carry capital across the boundaries between socialist China and newly industrializing China, they cannot usually leave socialist China completely behind. Their ability to acquire capital depends on their official position or at least their official connections. Since much of the appropriation of public property is officially illegal. Since much of the appropriation of public property is officially illegal, they are always vulnerable to blackmail and must remain in the good graces of high officials for protection. In the absence of institutionalized contract laws, enforceable by impartial judges, capitalists also must rely on personal relationships with higher-level officials -- or on criminal gangs that can only function effectively with permission from high-level officials -- for protection of their interests.

Thus, the boundary between state and civil society begins to blur. The transition between state and civil society takes place in an "unofficial" realm - an informal and usually partially hidden dimension of official bureaucracy. There is really no good, established term to denote the political economy that results from this. Some scholars have called it "bureaucratic capitalism," but the term does not capture the anomic fluidity with which bureaucratic power is translated into capitalist wealth. Some have called it "relationship (guanxi) capitalism" to denote the extent to which it depends on informal, interpersonal relations. But that term does not capture the extent to which the relationships get their power through connections with established bureaucracies. Perhaps the best, although still imperfect, term might be "patrimonial capitalism." This captures the way in which powerful officials treat their organizations as their personal household and can make decisions without having to consistently follow rules.

In any case, the owners and investors of dynamic enterprises in newly industrializing China do not (yet) form an independent bourgeoisie whose interest are at odds with the socialist state. Their interests would not lead to them towards any fundamental challenge to the current political arrangements that govern China. 

If socialist China is the primary source of domestic capital (as opposed to foreign investment) for newly industrializing China, the primary source for labor is third-world China. About 150 million rural Chinese now belong to a "floating population" of migrant laborers. In Chinese, they are not called "workers," or gongren, which is the dignified name for the proletariat who were supposed to be the leaders and chief beneficiaries of the communist revolution. The rural migrants are simply said to "do labor" -- dagong -- and the term evokes the temporary, insecure, low-paid existence that they live. These laborers from the countryside have no permanent residence permits for the cities where they work. Some come on short-term contracts to work in export-oriented factories. But for most there is no possibility of finding careers in factory work. If they get too old or sick to work, or wish to get married, or become disabled, they are sent home to the countryside. Other migrant laborers come in illegally and are tolerated as long as there is a need for them to do jobs other urban residents do not want (and sometimes as long as appropriate bribes are paid to police and other officials). The men typically do low-skilled construction work and the women work as domestic servants. Some also fill jobs in the extensive underground economy, such as in the thriving prostitution industry. Migrant laborers are often looked down upon by urban residents and blamed (mostly unfairly) for rising crime and disorder. They can be arbitrarily sent back home when it appears that they might compete with urban residents for jobs, or even when authorities want to beautify a city -- for example, when the International Olympic Committee visited Beijing to consider its bid to host the games.

To get to the cities and find work, migrants usually have to rely on networks of informal brokers, often connected to power holders in their local towns and villages. Thus, movement out of the countryside is made possible only through the political authority structure of third-world China. Once in the cities, the migrants often have to rely on other unofficial brokers to negotiate relationships with the police and other urban authorities. Often they come without their spouses and they usually have to return home regularly to attend to family matters. They also may have to return for medical care, since they are not entitled to any in the city, as well as for scrutiny by local authorities, who remain responsible for guaranteeing their proper behavior. The unmarried housekeeper of an acquaintance in Beijing, for instance, had to return to her native village every six months to be examined for pregnancy (and to have an abortion if she were found pregnant).

Some migrants have some quite successful, especially by starting small retail businesses. Even those who have miserable jobs and low pay, however, continue to come to the cities, because the pay is more than they can get in the countryside. Much of their money is remitted back to their families to help pay off debts and perhaps to invest in local businesses. Also, as if in compensation for their low status in the cities, they sometimes build large houses back in the villages, or fancy tombs for their ancestors, a practice that uses up farmland and makes villagers even more dependent on income from labor migration.

Both the money and the ideas that the migrants acquire are certainly bringing important changes to third-world China. The most visible signs of these changes are ubiquitous televisions sets and home appliances such as washing machines (which are popular even where there is no running water and they have to be filled by hand), and movie-star pinups (the modern rural aesthetic is partial to "bikini pictures", often of Western women). More important than the status symbols of consumer culture are the skills of commercial culture, which disseminate more slowly than consumer culture. In some places, especially in suburban areas of Guangdong and Zhejiang, these influences are blurring the boundary between third-world China and newly industrializing China. Remittances from migrant workers help to finance township and village enterprises and the knowledge and contacts brought by returning migrant workers can make these enterprises successful. However, as noted above, in many other areas of third-world China, especially farther inland, TVEs are collapsing, and rural industrialization is going backward. 

As long as migrant workers do not have full rights of residence in cities, the fundamental boundaries between the social systems will remain in most places. Indeed, the very success of newly industrializing China, and the interests of the investors who most profit from it, depend on its difference vis-a-vis third-world China. It is that difference that ensures the constant supply of cheap and docile labor that is important for export-oriented development. The docility comes from the fact that miserable work in the newly industrializing system can bring relative status and prestige in the third-world system and that entrenched authorities in the third-world system - parents, clan leaders, local bosses -- have an interest in disciplining the workers who go to the city. Although there has been much unrest directed against local power holders in the countryside, there has been little overt labor unrest in the export-oriented enclaves of newly industrializing China, even though the living conditions of laborers in this system are much worse that those of workers in the state-owned enterprises of socialist China.

### Uneasy Balances

The uneasy balance among third-world China, socialist China, and newly industrializing China has so far maintained itself because almost everyone within these systems can hope for some improvement in their lives by at least temporarily crossing borders to another system. Underemployed farmers can improve their incomes by migrating to the cities; and they relieve themselves of their low status in the city by returning to flaunt their new money and their urban sophistication back home in the countryside. Modestly paid officials in urban bureaucracies and state-owned enterprises can turn their power into money by channeling investments into the newly industrializing system; and they can protect themselves against the uncertainties of cutthroat capitalist competition by relying on the political institutions of socialist China.

The biggest losers under the present arrangements are middle-aged workers in the system of state-owned enterprises who are losing their livelihood but lack the skills necessary to find new work. Even they, however, are not totally without hope. At least sometimes, they can get connected to the more dynamically growing sectors of society through family members. Many urban families practice "one family, two systems." That is, one spouse works in the state sector (and makes full use of whatever entitlement to housing and health care that still exist there), and the other spouse or a son or daughter works in the newly industrializing sector -- and not in the low-wage sector but in the relatively high-paid white-collar sectors. The spouse of children can then make up for other spouse’s lost wages and pension benefits. And as China makes the transition from being a manufacture of commodities made with lost-cost, semi-skilled labor to manufacturer of high-tech products, the people who find jobs in the newly industrializing sector will be from the families of workers in today's distressed state-owned enterprises. The one-family, two-systems solution may not work in many case, however, because of the success of the government in enforcing its one-child policy in the cities. An adult singleton has to take care of both his or her own parents and in-laws. Together with an increasing divorce rate, this means that urban family members will find it more difficult to compensate for the losses some members face in the changing economic system.

In the near future, at least, the most volatile sector of Chinese society will probably be its urban working class, angry and desperate because of the implosion of state-owned enterprises. The urban working class has so far shown itself unable to developed enough solidarity to overturn the status quo. It is divided internally because of the nature of work units in state-owned enterprises. By providing a total package of services for workers, and by restricting lateral movement of workers to other enterprises, these work units kept workers from developing the habit of linking up with counterparts in other factories or industrial sectors. Moreover, as we have pointed out, the urban proletariat is not inclined to link up with laborers migrating from rural China and it has little sympathy for farmers in general. The Chinese government is extremely sensitive toward groups that might bridge these divisions among the discontented. It crushes any attempts to form autonomous labor unions. And the vigor of its persecution of the Falun Gong and similar religious groups is probably due to fear of the capacity of such groups to forge bonds across regions and social classes. For all that, it appears that workers are beginning to link up with aggrieved counterparts throughout China. The stability of the current regime will depend on how successful they are.

### Consequences

China today is thus an unstable condominium of at least three different social systems. For now, what ties them together is codependency without synergy -- a situation in which it is in the interest of the most powerful people in each system to maintain the status quo that exploits the weakest people within system. This is a situation so complex, and potentially so unstable, that there is no way to accurately forecast its future.

To hold this fragile unity of complex parts together, the Chinese Communist Party has been reinvented itself, first in practice and now in theory, as a corporatist party, that is, a party that supposedly represents the interests of all sectors of society and reconciles competing interests Jiang Zemin's theory of the "Three Represents", which was made official party doctrine at the 16th Party Congress, states that the Party represents advanced progressive forces in Chinese society, including business entrepreneurs who are now officially eligible to become Party members. If one were to represent this symbolically, the hammer and sickle might have to be superimposed on top of a stock portfolio! How are these interests - fundamentally incompatible in classical Marxist theory - to be reconciled? Jiang Zemin's theory is mainly a pastiche of empty slogans that give no coherent answer. In practice, however, the interests are being reconciled through the dynamics of a patrimonial state. Not bound to the masses through enforceable bureaucratic rules, the elites bind themselves to one another through webs of personal, clientalistic relationships. Their main common denominator is an interest in maintaining the Party's monopoly on rule.

Such a corporatist party conjoined with a patrimonial state can maintain a reasonable degree of social stability and economic development for a long time - a good example would be Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party, which governed Mexico for seventy-one years. A problem endemic to such political arrangements, however, is corruption. Irregular behavior is built into the very process of maintaining peace through personal negotiations among elites who nominally represent different interests. The Party's monopoly on power further increases such temptations. A strong sense of nationalism may temporarily maintain some degree of integrity among Party personnel. But the temptations of easy money proffered by modern criminal groups - smugglers, narco traffickers, and money launderers - quickly and deeply undermine such elite integrity and cohesion as well as deepening the anger and cynicism of citizens toward their government. Citizen disgust with such corruption led to the peaceful demise of the Mexican PRI and the Kuomintang in Taiwan, which were swept aside at the ballot box. Might the same happen to the CCP in China?

In the above-cited cases, the peaceful demise of corrupt party structures required, first of all, the establishment of formal procedures for democratic elections, even though the ruling party regularly used its power to subvert the formal rules. The Chinese government is now beginning to develop such rules for free elections at the rural level, even though, as we have seen, the rules are regularly broken so that the Party can retain its dominance. Although there are no signs that this will happen in the near future, one could imagine a scenario in which to co-opt discontented citizens, the government allowed such elections at higher levels. Even if it did so, the Party would still probably retain all of the effective levers of power. What could finally break that power would be the growth of an active civil society among those social sectors who do not have a stake in continued corruption and who have the sophistication and organizational skills to make use of the formal rules to pursue their interests in a peaceful manner.

We can do no more than speculate about how and when such an active civil society might arise. The most probable source would be the emerging middle classes described at the beginning of this chapter. Millions of people now engage in the technical, managerial, and public relations work of the emerging private sector. Imbued with a sense that they can get ahead on the basis of their own talents, adept at new modes of communication like the Internet, accustomed to constructing identities on the basis of free choice among consumer goods, able to interact with like-minded peers on the basis of non-political horizontal relationships that flourish in an expanding private sphere, such citizens are beginning to develop an array of non-political free associations devoted to self-help, education, and charitable endeavors. According to Deborah Davis, we should not underestimate "the ability of increased sociability in nonofficial activities to incubate loyalties that ultimately generate the actions capable of weakening or toppling an authoritarian state." 

But the foundations for such a civil society are only located in one relatively small section of newly industrializing China. It may take several decades before it flourishes to the point where it could generate alternatives to the current authoritarian rule. Even this presupposes a China that remains stable and continues a path of steady economic growth.

The uneasy balance of contradictory forces that I have described in terms of "one country, three systems" is, then, inherently unstable. Its evolution will probably take place not according to some predictable dialectic but according to the contingencies of chaos theory, in which small changes in one area can lead unpredictably to big changes in another. In such an open-ended situation, the quality of leadership can make a big difference, which is why the decisions made at the 16th Party Congress may be so important.


##	一个国家，三种制度：后江泽民时代的国家-社会关系

_Richard Madsen_

在过去十年中，中国的社会发展非常不平衡，充满了矛盾。一方面，快速的经济增长创造了一个蓬勃发展的城市中产阶级，其成员享有舒适的繁荣（小康）和比中国历史上任何时候都更高的个人自由。这种自由的核心是能够选择自己的职业，在不同的工作之间流动，甚至是自己创业。这个新的中产阶级的成员可以认为生活的基本必需品是理所当然的，如足够的食物、衣服和住房，他们忙于在消费社会提供的各种各样的地位象征中作出个人选择，以形成个人身份感。通常情况下，具有最高地位的商品恰恰是那些属于全球品牌体系的商品，其中大部分是美国产的，如星巴克咖啡、耐克鞋和麦当劳汉堡包。我们很容易得出结论，这个新的中产阶级--越来越多地在金碧辉煌的现代主义办公楼里工作，通过穿着最新的时装和培养世界性的饮食品味，不安地寻求赚钱和获得地位的新方法--正在拥抱 "美国的生活方式"。

然而，应该抵制这种诱惑。尽管中国新的中产阶级的愿望确实反映了美国的自由市场意识形态、个人主义和消费主义，但这些愿望在中国的表达背景非常不同。在美国，"美国的生活方式 "几乎渗透到了整个社会，并由几乎所有的社会机构来维持。在中国，它只能在占人口不到10%的经理人、专业人士和成功企业家组成的中产阶级中实现。以任何人的标准来看，这是一个相当大的群体--也许有 1 亿人，但它漂浮在 13 亿人的海洋中，其中许多人是贫穷的（如果不是绝对意义上的，至少是在他们对什么是体面的生活不断增长的期望方面）和没有安全感。此外，中产阶级对个人自由和个人成就的渴望与主导中国生活的许多制度不一致，包括专制的共产党、限制地域流动性的居住证制度、仍然雇用约40%城市劳动力的国有企业，以及构建大部分农村生活的大家庭和企业世家。

在这种情况下，日益增长的经济增长可能不会导致广泛的共享繁荣，而是导致社会冲突的加剧。社会某些部门的现代化（在此定义为个人自主的机会增加，加上普遍性规则的公共监管）与其他部门的新形式的传统主义（在此定义为个人从属于通过非正式的特殊关系管理的企业集团）形成对比。麦当劳和星巴克的空调世界与下岗工人、移民劳工和就业不足的农民的恶劣环境共存。个人企业和公平竞争的价值观与许多种类的腐败和政治操纵共存。

本章概述了"第四代 "领导下的转型期中国社会。这是一幅通过相互依赖的关系将一个脆弱的整体捆绑在一起的画面，处于一种脆弱的平衡状态。为了理解当代中国社会的对比和悖论，我认为可以把中国社会看作是由几个互不相容的社会系统组成的，每个系统都有独特的内部分层系统，独特的生活课程模式，以及对自我和社会之间适当关系的一套独特的文化理解。尽管绝非完全兼容，但每个系统的不同组成部分都有一种相互的协同作用，这与他们与其他系统之间更加充满张力的关系形成鲜明对比。他们从彼此身上获得了足够多的表面的、短期的利益，从而避免了面对其基本的长期不相容性。

我们可以把这些制度称为 "第三世界中国"、"社会主义中国 "和 "新兴工业化中国"。这些制度是理想的类型，没有任何地方能与经验现实完全对应。它们在地理区域中占主导地位。第三世界中国最恰当地描述了中国中部和西部的内陆地区--主要是农村，以家庭劳动农业为基础，在一些地方被民族和宗教冲突所困扰。社会主义中国最恰当地描述了工业化的东北地区，仍然由大型国有企业的遗产所主导。中国沿海地区的经济增长充满活力，以出口为导向，最明显符合新兴工业化经济的描述。然而，这些系统并不能从地理上整齐地区分开来。例如，即使在中国的沿海地区，人们也可以找到一些体现第三世界中国和社会主义中国特点的社会模式。

这些系统之间的关系是由腐败的官员、移民劳工和多样化的家庭等行为者调解的。我将论证，一些人在这些系统之间流动的能力，有助于分散社会冲突，但这些系统之间的整体关系本质上是不稳定的。我将首先介绍这三个系统中的每一个，然后讨论它们之间不稳定关系的条件。最后，我将讨论由此产生的矛盾力量之间的不稳定平衡对社会稳定和政治体制变革的影响。

### 第三世界的中国

在第三世界的中国，社会地位在很大程度上取决于一个人在政治和企业世家的地位。虽然政治权力的获得取决于党和国家官僚机构的正式批准，但权力的实际操作非常依赖于与亲属和社区的非正式个人关系，以至于许多领导人可以成为国家无法有效控制的 "地方皇帝"。在这种社会体系中，一个成功的生命历程开始于对男性主导的家庭的依赖，也结束于对男性主导的家庭的依赖。一个舒适而光荣的晚年，尤其取决于被一个人的成年儿子和他们的妻子所照顾。这种制度的合理性在于强调家庭中心地位的文化价值观，强调维持有序的家庭权力等级制度的重要性，以及家庭成员之间的相互义务。

这种制度非常符合小规模、劳动密集型农业的要求。在中国，约有 70%的人口（约 8 亿人）居住在村庄里，他们中的大多数人以耕作为生。典型的农场由一个家庭组成，负责耕种大约一亩（1/15 公顷）的土地。该家庭消费其生产的大约三分之二的产品，其余的在国家高度管制的市场上出售。一个家庭通常由丈夫和妻子、他们的孩子以及丈夫的父母组成。这个家庭通常与其他家庭毗邻而居，他们通过男性血统拥有共同的祖先。亲属关系的纽带带来了重要的道德要求，促进了相关家庭之间的合作，同时鼓励他们将自己的利益与非相关家庭分开。在这个系统中，妇女在某种程度上是永久的外人。她们嫁入丈夫的家庭和家族，并把通过生育男性子女来继承这一家族作为其主要责任。父母必须依靠男孩子在其出生的村子里照顾他们的晚年，而男孩子则致力于留在村子里。这种安排与大多数农业社会中的安排大致相似。

虽然这种制度并不是 "传统 "中国社会的直接延续--现代之前的社会过于多样化和多变，无法构成一个固定的 "传统"--但当今农村制度的某些要素无疑与长期的文化实践产生了共鸣。这种制度在今天占主导地位，不仅仅是由于历史的惯性，而且是由于中华人民共和国政府强加的具体制度安排。毛泽东政权在意识形态上反对中国传统家庭的 "封建 "做法，它压制了许多传统家庭仪式。然而，毛主义的许多组织安排实际上有助于保留这种家庭生活的一些基本特征。人民公社制度有效地将农民限制在农业劳动中，使他们几乎不可能离开自己的家乡。社会保障几乎完全建立在家庭成员的相互支持上。任何村子里最可怜的居民都是那些在年老时不得不依靠政府的微薄救济的人，因为他们附近没有活着的家庭成员。即使毛派政权粉碎了传统的地方精英，他们也加强了传统精英统治所依据的文化分类体系。通过给被废黜的 "豪门"--地主和富农--贴上官方的坏等级标签，并使其可以通过男性血统继承，毛派肯定了亲属关系的持续重要性和政治地位的固定等级的存在。

在邓小平的改革下，人民公社在 20 世纪 80 年代初被拆除。 农民现在对如何管理他们的农业生产有了更大的灵活性，有了更多的机会去寻找非农业工作，他们受到的意识形态压力也小得多。但新的制度安排保留了以家庭为基础的农业政治经济的最重要特征。目前的制度以 "家庭责任制 "取代了集体所有制，在这种制度下，每个家庭可以长期使用一小块土地，但不允许出售土地或将其用于非农业用途。这种小规模的耕作制度加强了上述的家庭式社会制度。同时，在没有意识形态驱动的情况下，试图消除传统的家庭习俗，诸如精心设计的婚姻和丧葬仪式等习俗已经恢复了。

此外，"户籍制度 "进一步加强了农民对其村庄和父系企业家庭的承诺。在这种制度下，农民不可能成为城市居民。正如我们将看到的，大量的农民事实上已经迁移到了城市，但他们作为寄居者，作为无证的外国人在那里生活和工作，没有任何权利获得国家补贴的医疗服务、子女的教育或退休养老金。如果他们想获得这些社会福利，就必须回到自己的村庄。

由于家庭责任制和户籍制度都没有变化，农民不得不像几个世纪以来一样，围绕着维护嵌在亲属关系网络中的强大家庭来确定自己的生活方向。因此，即使中国迅速现代化，正如中国学者曹晶晶在最近一本重要的书中所论述的那样，中国仍然在很大程度上保持着在帝国末期繁荣的农村社会制度的连续性。

变化是有的。但最近的变化加剧了晚期帝国制度中一些最成问题的方面，而不是超越了这个制度。在晚期的帝国体系中，一个人变得富有，不是通过成为一个更有效率的农民，而是通过获得儒家教育和获得进入国家的政治机会。在获得这样的机会后，一个人可以通过向普通农民索要好处，以换取家长式的保护他们的一些利益，从而获得大量财富。当儒家伦理强大的时候，当地的 "乡绅 "和普通农民之间可能会有一些真正的互惠，特别是那些通过与当地精英的延伸亲属关系联系起来的农民。然而，到了帝国时代的末期，这种关系往往变得严酷的剥削性，在革命期间，共产党的组织者可以动员农民反对 "恶绅"。

20 世纪 90 年代，许多旧的剥削模式开始报复性地回归，这是在紧缩的农村经济中传统文化的各个方面重新出现的结果。在 1980 年代初开始实行家庭责任制时，农业生产力迅速提高。食品和住房的质量得到改善。生活在联合国定义的绝对贫困中的人数缩减到不到人口的 10%。但生活水平的提高提高了人们的期望。大众传播的普及（大约 80% 的农户现在有电视）使农民更加意识到农村和城市之间的差距在扩大。然后，即使整个中国经济在 1990 年代中期开始以惊人的速度增长，农民的收入也开始急剧下降，这是粮食价格下降（由于政府希望避免城市动乱而保持低价）以及农具和化肥价格上涨的受害者。同时，医疗和教育费用的上涨超出了许多农民的支付能力。

如果不把小农户合并成大企业，就没有办法提高农业的效率，而家庭责任制又排除了这种选择。增加农民收入的另一个希望是乡镇企业（TVEs）。这些是可以利用廉价剩余劳动力的地方工厂。乡镇企业通常是由整个社区拥有的股份制公司，但其利润往往主要归社区官员所有。在 20 世纪 80 年代末和 90 年代初，它们经常产生足够的收入来抵消农业收益的减少。但是，那些远离城市郊区、缺乏足够的交通基础设施和管理专业知识的 TVE，很难实现盈利。在 20世纪 90 年代末，它们中的大多数倒闭了，给村庄留下了债务和破碎的梦想。

在这种情况下，对许多农民来说，获得财富的最有希望的途径似乎是传统的途径--当官和/或让自己的孩子获得官职。旧的集体农业制度的结束本应通过缩小地方政府的规模来实现一定的效率，最初也是如此。但在 20 世纪 90 年代，乡镇和村级政府的规模扩大了 400%以上。这些官员的工资来自于向当地人征收的价值可疑的服务费的不断增加。袁明在《黄河岸边的中国》一书中，引用了他在河南省进行的广泛采访中的一些例子。一个镇在 1970 年代被组织为人民公社时有 20 名政府官员。现在有 150 人，其中约四分之三可能是多余的。增加最多的地方政府部门是那些从罚款和税收中获得收入的部门，如计划生育和公共安全。

在 "天高皇帝远 "的农村落后地区，地方官员更多依靠的是地方收费而不是官僚工资，他们不仅无视中央政府的政策，有时还把它们变成相反的政策。这种反作用的一个例子是中央政府的计划生育项目的实施方式。为了防止农民生育超过一个孩子（如果第一个孩子是女孩，则是两个孩子），计划生育官员征收高额罚款，许多家庭愿意支付这些罚款，因为生儿子很重要，因为儿子将承担照顾父母老年生活的责任。但是，由于当地的计划生育官员依靠罚款（可能还有贿赂）获得收入，他们实际上鼓励当地的农民在法律允许的范围内生育更多孩子。

在过去几年内，紧缩的农村经济和寄生的、剥削性的官员的结合已经开始达到一个危机点。在 2000 年 8 月发表在《南方周末》杂志上的一封愤怒的信中，一位诚实的地方官员抱怨说，一些农民的净收入实际上已经下降到零以下，因为他们无法筹集足够的现金来支付税费。其结果是广泛的抗议，有时是暴乱。根据《南华邮报》的一篇文章，仅在 1999 年就发生了 2000 多起 "针对农村当局的骚乱和其他暴力示威活动"。而且，从那时起，这些数字似乎一直在增加。最后，在 2002 年 1 月，《人民日报》的一篇社论承认，农村的不满情绪是对国家稳定的严重威胁，并呼吁政府 "对农民多予少取，提供更多服务，减少干预，避免伤害农民的感情和利益"。

然而，为了进行这种改革，中央官员必须对地方官员进行更牢固的控制。促进地方治理改革的一个方法是实行村官选举。从 1999 年开始，这种基层民主的试验已经在中国广泛展开。但是，参加选举的村官并不是那些对农民的生活有很大实权的人。敢于抗议上级官员的腐败和管理不善的当选村官有时会被殴打或监禁。认真的改革需要对乡镇和县级政府的官员进行自由选举。然而，迄今为止，政府还没有对这一举措表现出兴趣，也许是因为它需要保留大多数乡镇和县级官员最起码的忠诚度，以压制民众的不满情绪，即使他们的行为使这种不满情绪更加恶化。

就像第三世界的殖民主义或新殖民主义政府无法缓解民众的不满情绪的来源一样，目前的政府只能通过保持不满情绪的分散来维持农村的稳定。分裂的一个主要来源是基于家庭关系的社会体系的特殊性。曹锦清在对河南村庄的研究中指出，自经济改革以来，家庭和家族权力的重要性增加了，其结果是村民之间的互助几乎从来没有超出过家族群体的范围。农民很难在普遍的、集体的利益基础上组织自己。在家庭和宗族的界限之外，他们 "不考虑代表自己的利益，而是期待别人来代表他们的利益"。

因此，尽管有数以千计的地方性农村抗议活动，但没有迹象表明这些抗议活动会与广泛的社会运动联系起来。这种联系可能发生的一种方式是通过民族或宗教身份的凝聚。因此，愤怒的穆斯林（回族）在相当长的距离内聚集在一起，抗议 2000 年秋天在山东省发生的民族挑衅。同样，成千上万的农村地下天主教徒抗议政府亵渎河北的一个朝圣地。政府投入了过多的精力来镇压这种农村团结的力量。另一个可能有助于这种团结的更现代的做法是参与比村庄更高级别的官员的民主政治运动。政府对此表现得兴趣不大也就不足为奇了。政府似乎在遵循一句老话，即有效的统治与其说取决于让公民热爱政府，不如说取决于确保他们不互相爱戴。

从理论上讲，对农民的不满情绪可以有两种激进的解决办法。一种是回到毛泽东式的社会主义--将一些城市资源重新分配给农村部门，同时保持对城市人口从农村到城市的流动的限制。农民对此的支持程度令人吃惊。曹景清和其他最近的作者指出，农村人仍然将毛泽东视为他们的救世主。而当最近为揭露艾滋病在试图通过卖血来补充收入的村民中的流行而做了大量工作的医生高义杰（不顾当地党政官员的反对）访问河南一个被忽视的艾滋病村时，一位感激的接受者说："我感谢共产党，我感谢毛主席。"

但在国家领导人中，几乎没有人支持毛主义社会主义。得到相当支持的替代方案是更激进的自由主义。人脉广泛的社会学家陆学艺写道："：

"我们需要创建一个 10 亿人的统一市场。我们不能再继续保持城市和农村两个分裂的市场，继续把农民关在城市之外......改革目前的户籍制度，向城市和乡镇敞开大门，以开放农民就业，这需要一套法律和政策来落实，并需要逐步实施。但进行这一变革不能再拖了。维持城乡分离是不可行的。

如果农民获得了对其土地的完全产权和完全的居住流动权，他们就可以从农民经济的传统约束中解放出来。他们可以更充分、更有效地利用他们的劳动能力，他们可以追求那些流动的、自愿的关系，这些关系是现代公民社会的基础。

但是，这种消除城乡之间障碍的自由化解决方案仍然存在根本性的障碍。在中国的内陆地区建立一个单一的、统一的、以市场为基础的系统存在着实际困难，这些地区缺乏足够的交通，其居民也缺乏向城市生活过渡的必要教育。而且还有一个基本的政治困难。大量拥有公民权的农民的涌入会对城市工人造成威胁，他们依赖廉价的粮食，并且已经对大规模的裁员感到愤怒，1989 年的天安门运动就证明了这一点，城市的不满情绪比农民的不满情绪更有可能凝聚成群众运动，威胁到现政权。至少在不久的将来，彻底消除城市和农村之间的障碍可能会受到实用主义的、利己的国家领导人的抵制。

它也可能因为纯粹的权力政治而受到抵制。当今中国制度的逻辑是，强者让弱者承担经济发展的成本。由于农民无组织，物质资源少，在国家层面上没有有效的代表，所以他们承担了过多的成本份额。将城市和农村分开的壁垒有助于巩固当地农村官员的权力，以及保护城市官员的权力，从而确保发展的大部分成本将由每个部门的底层人员承担。但在我们充分展示这项工作之前，我们需要更完整地描述社会主义中国及其工业化阶段。

### 社会主义中国

在社会主义中国，社会地位一直取决于官僚等级制度中的等级。权力是由共产党内的上级赞助获得的。一个令人满意的生活过程取决于加入一个令人满意的 "工作单位"，在其官僚等级中不断晋升，最后靠工作单位提供的退休金退休。安德鲁-瓦尔德（Andrew Walder）称之为 "新传统主义"，这是一种在政治家长制下的有组织的依赖性制度，为这一制度提供了理由。这种社会制度的基础是国有企业，它们是再分配主义、中央计划社会主义经济的基础。

国有企业仍然雇用着中国城市劳动力的大约40%。然而，这个系统现在正处于危机之中。尽管国有企业不再由中央计划机构进行微观管理，但它们通过政府银行的贷款进行融资，这些银行根据政治关系而不是经济效率来分配资金。由于多年来没有盈利的压力，许多企业无法偿还贷款，中国的银行系统在技术上可能已经破产。

今天的大多数国有企业都是低效的，因为它们的工人太过臃肿。虽然雇用了 40%的城市劳动力，但它们只生产了不到30%的工业产值。在国家社会主义制度下，充分就业一直很重要，因为国有企业负责提供全面的福利待遇：住房、学校教育、医疗和养老金。作为对企业和维持企业的政治制度的忠诚的回报，工人们被承诺提供安全。

但是，企业再也无法履行这一承诺了。他们再也无力支付全部的福利待遇了。例如，工人们必须为医疗支付越来越大的免赔额，而养老金福利现在也不足以维持一个舒适的退休生活。然而，对大多数工人来说，在雇用他们的 "工作单位 "之外，没有任何社会保障制度可以提供负担得起的福利。

为了提高其效率，国有企业一直在裁员。这一过程通常被称为 "下岗"。工人们失去了大部分工资，但通常不会被赶出企业提供的几乎免费的住房，他们还能保留一些医疗福利。也许有 4500 万到 6000 万城市工人以这种方式被解雇，而且随着中国遇到世界贸易组织成员带来的国际市场压力，肯定会有更多人被解雇。许多其他国有企业正在被完全关闭，或出售给私人投资者，有时与跨国公司合资。当这种情况发生时，退休或被裁减的工人往往会失去所有的养老金和福利待遇。

20	世纪 90 年代初，许多年轻的创业者辞去工作，正如人们所说的那样，"进入社会 "或"跳进 "市场经济中自由企业的海洋。基于对私营部门大量新机会的认识，形成了 "跳海热"。然而，到了90年代中期，对许多人来说，这些机会只是一种幻觉。大多数中年工人（35 岁及以上）发现不可能在私营部门找到新的工作，至少在他们已经习惯的收入和福利水平上是如此。而退休工人在他们的前雇主被私有化后，目前没有人可以替代他们失去的养老金。

由于不可能从国家社会主义制度中退出，失业工人越来越多地在公开抗议中表达他们的愤怒。自 1990 年代中期以来，在整个中国的老工业区，已经有数千次罢工和示威，有时是暴力的。在 2001 年和 2002 年，抗议活动的规模似乎更大，暴力程度也更高。
 
例如，2002 年 3 月，5 万名工人在黑龙江省大庆市的石油生产基地举行了为期数周的抗议活动，这个企业在毛泽东时代被誉为中国社会主义的英雄胜利之一。抗议活动不得不由人民武装警察（中国维护公共秩序的准军事部队）控制。在这次抗议中，与其他此类抗议一样，工人的愤怒是由于国有企业没有为下岗员工维持适当的医疗和养老金福利而点燃的。在典型的社会主义制度下，工人们与其说是要求结束社会主义，不如说是要求这个制度兑现其承诺，为他们提供体面的社会保障，以回报他们的忠诚。

尽管国家社会主义制度显然正在衰落，但它并没有顺利地消解为市场经济。它正在内爆，并粉碎了许多被卷入其中的人的希望。最后的结果可能是更大的愤怒的爆发。

### 新兴工业化的中国

中国目前经济活力的来源是其市场驱动的、以出口为导向的制造业体系。在这个体系中，地位是基于金钱（并通过显眼的消费来展示）。权力取决于与官僚的个人关系（用钱买），但不取决于对官僚规则的遵守。一个成功的人生历程取决于是否有足够的钱来照顾自己。所有这些都被一种通过竞争取得进步的社会达尔文主义意识形态所证明。据报道，卡尔-马克思在一份中国小报的断章取义中说："生活是一片海洋，""只有那些有坚强意志的人才能到达彼岸。"

新兴工业化的中国是一个社会、政治、经济和文化体系，普遍遵循亚洲新兴工业化经济体的发展模式，如台湾、韩国、香港和新加坡。这种模式利用国家动员全国的劳动力和资本来制造商品，出口到全球消费市场--当然，其中心是美国。与其他处于发展初期的新兴工业化经济体一样，中国的做法集中于利用廉价劳动力来生产轻工业产品。

目前，中国的大部分出口产品来自广东省的深圳和东莞以及福建省的厦门等地的小工厂，那里的年轻妇女大多以每小时不到 10 美分的价格生产纺织品、玩具和消费电子产品。但是这些血汗工厂正在让位于上海和天津等地的高科技工厂，这些工厂的工人生产相对先进的计算机芯片、移动电话和药品。这些工厂还雇用白领工人从事管理、会计和推广工作。中国新兴的中产阶级大部分来自这一阶层。

这些工厂的大部分资本和技术来自国外，而产品最终往往以美国、日本、韩国或台湾公司的品牌出售。资本的流动是为了寻找这样的劳动力：（1）相对于它所需要的技能而言，是比较便宜的；（2）是灵活的（也就是说，它可以很容易地被雇用、解雇和转移，以适应市场驱动的生产的灵活需求）。这些经济要求带来了与第三世界的中国不同的社会关系，中国的农民在亲属关系的网络中纠缠不清，而在社会主义中国，工人有组织地依赖管理和政治等级制度。在新兴工业化经济盛行的地区，社会环境由联系松散的个人组成。秩序是通过专制政治来维持的，专制政治的重点是保持工人的温顺，同时允许所有者和管理者有近乎自由主义的自由。在任何劳工动乱的迹象下，警察都会立即作出反应，但很少执行工人安全或环境保护条例（如果存在的话）。

这种劳动制度在许多东亚新兴工业化经济体的早期阶段很常见。然而，中国和其他国家之间存在着重要的区别。后者致力于通过教育稳步提升国家劳动力的质量，以便他们能够生产更多的技术密集型和增值产品。因此，即使工人在恶劣的条件下受苦，他们也可以期待自己的孩子过上更好的生活。但是，尽管中国政府希望跟随其他新兴工业化经济体的步伐，发展以高科技生产为基础的经济，但它并没有为大多数工人的子女提供高质量的教育。事实上，由于出口加工厂的大多数工人来自农村，那里的学校一直在不断恶化，他们可能现实地期望他们的孩子得到的教育会比他们少。而当低技术、半技能的工作被高科技、高技能的职业所取代时，今天血汗工厂工人的受教育程度低的孩子可能没有资格获得新的工作。中国新兴高科技产业的工人可能来自不同的劳动力库，即来自大城市学校的毕业生或从国外回来的学生。

中国的发展模式与其他东亚新兴工业化经济体的另一个区别是，其他经济体通常致力于产业规划，政府通过将投资资金战略性地用于研究和开发来鼓励新兴产业的发展。中国的新兴工业化模式则更为自由放任。与日本、韩国、台湾、香港和新加坡的早期工业发展阶段相比，中国的发展具有自由、混乱的特点。

为了了解新兴工业化的中国如何取得如此成功，以及辨别其潜在的失败，我们现在必须看看新兴工业化中国、社会主义中国和第三世界中国之间的关系。

### 跨越边界

这三个制度上和文化上不相容的社会系统通过个人网络相互连接。这些网络提供了路径，通过这些路径，某些群体可以跨越不同系统之间的界限。这些人携带着重要的资源，主要是劳动能力和资本。虽然这种流动并不完全是单向的，但大部分资源都进入了新兴的工业化中国。它从社会主义中国汲取资本，从第三世界的中国汲取劳动力。这种转移不是通过任何制度化的、公开合法的程序进行的，而是通过有能力独立于现代法律或传统道德的个人进行的。

因此，在新兴工业化的中国，私人工业的大部分启动资本被私人从国有企业的公共财产中侵占--总之，是通过腐败。但 "腐败 "一词过于宽泛，无法帮助我们辨别这种原始资本积累的许多不同方式，也无法区分这些做法带来的不同程度的伤害和利益。社会学家丁学良和何清涟生动地描述了私人侵占公共物品的各种方法--有些非常巧妙。例如，一家亏损的国有工厂的经理可能会成立一家私营公司，利用国有工厂所有最好的机器和最熟练的工人，从而在市场经济中获得丰厚的利润，其中一些可以用来资助私营公司的进一步改进。与此同时，国有工厂的债务却越陷越深，最后破产。这个计划和其他计划有一些共同的特点：一个只对上级官员而不是对下级雇员负责的经理；高级官员不是通过正式的规则，而是通过与下级的个人、客户关系来执行他们的权力；以及不明确的公共和私人利益分离的规定。用一位从中获利的商人的话来说，这些计划中的某些计划无异于 "吸食国家的血液"。但是，其他的计划，正如这里所举的例子，实际上可能有助于中国的发展，将公共资产转化为有效的用途，而且比通过正式的、官僚机构批准的程序更快、更有效地完成。然而，中国的经济发展是新兴工业化中国的发展，它并没有使那些无法离开社会主义中国的工人受益。

虽然官僚转行的企业家可以带着资本跨越社会主义中国和新兴工业化中国之间的界限，但他们通常不能完全离开社会主义中国。他们获得资本的能力取决于他们的官方地位，或者至少是他们的官方关系。由于对公共财产的大部分侵占在官方看来是非法的。由于对公共财产的大部分侵占在官方看来是非法的，他们总是容易受到勒索，必须保持与高官的良好关系以获得保护。在缺乏可由公正的法官执行的制度化合同法的情况下，资本家还必须依靠与高层官员的个人关系--或者依靠只有在高层官员允许下才能有效运作的犯罪团伙--来保护他们的利益。

因此，国家和公民社会之间的界限开始变得模糊。国家和公民社会之间的过渡发生在一个 "非官方 "的领域--官方官僚机构的一个非正式和通常部分隐藏的层面。真的没有一个好的、既定的术语来表示由此产生的政治经济。一些学者称其为 "官僚资本主义"，但这个词并没有捕捉到官僚权力转化为资本主义财富的原子流动性。有些人称它为 "关系（guanxi）资本主义"，以表示它对非正式的人际关系的依赖程度。但这个词并没有反映出这些关系在多大程度上是通过与既定官僚机构的联系而获得权力的。也许最好的，尽管仍不完善的术语可能是 "世袭资本主义"。这反映了有权势的官员把他们的组织当作他们的个人家庭，可以在不需要一贯遵守规则的情况下做出决定。

无论如何，在新兴工业化的中国，有活力的企业的所有者和投资者（还）没有形成一个独立的资产阶级，他们的利益与社会主义国家相抵触。他们的利益不会导致他们对目前治理中国的政治安排提出任何根本性的挑战。

如果说社会主义中国是新兴工业化中国的国内资本（相对于外国投资）的主要来源，那么劳动力的主要来源就是第三世界的中国。现在约有 1.5 亿中国农村人口属于流动人口，即外来务工人员。在中文中，他们不被称为 "工人 "或 "工友"，这是对无产阶级的尊称，他们应该是共产主义革命的领导者和主要受益者。农村移民被简单地称为 "做工"--dagong--这个词唤起了他们临时的、不安全的、低工资的生活。这些来自农村的劳动者在他们工作的城市里没有永久居留证。有些人以短期合同的形式来到出口型工厂工作。但对大多数人来说，他们不可能在工厂工作中找到职业。如果他们太老或生病不能工作，或希望结婚，或成为残疾人，他们就会被送回农村。其他外来务工人员是非法入境的，只要需要他们从事其他城市居民不愿意做的工作（有时还需要向警察和其他官员支付适当的贿赂），就会被容忍。男性通常从事低技能的建筑工作，女性则从事家政服务。有些人还在广泛的地下经济中担任工作，例如在繁荣的卖淫业中。城市居民往往看不起外来务工人员，并将犯罪和混乱的增加归咎于他们（大多是不公平的）。当他们看起来可能与城市居民竞争工作时，甚至当当局想要美化城市时，他们会被任意遣送回家，例如，当国际奥林匹克委员会访问北京以考虑其申办奥运会时。

为了进入城市并找到工作，移民通常必须依靠非正式的经纪人网络，这些经纪人通常与当地城镇和村庄的权力所有者有联系。因此，只有通过第三世界中国的政治权力结构，才有可能走出农村。一旦到了城市，移民往往不得不依靠其他非官方的经纪人来与警察和其他城市当局谈判关系。他们来的时候往往没有配偶，他们通常必须定期回家处理家庭事务。他们还可能必须返回家中接受医疗服务，因为他们在城市中无权享受任何医疗服务，同时还要接受地方当局的审查，而地方当局仍然有责任保证他们的正常行为。例如，北京一位熟人的未婚女管家，每隔六个月就得回到她的家乡，接受怀孕检查（如果发现怀孕，就得进行流产）。

一些移民取得了相当大的成功，特别是通过创办小型零售企业。然而，即使是那些工作悲惨、工资低的人，也继续来到城市，因为工资比他们在农村能得到的更多。他们的大部分钱都汇回了家里，以帮助偿还债务，也许还可以投资于当地企业。此外，为了补偿他们在城市的低下地位，他们有时会在村里建造大房子，或者为他们的祖先建造豪华的坟墓，这种做法占用了农田，使村民更加依赖劳动力迁移的收入。

移民获得的金钱和思想无疑都给第三世界的中国带来了重要的变化。这些变化最明显的标志是无处不在的电视机和家用电器，如洗衣机（即使在没有自来水的地方也很受欢迎，必须用手去装），以及电影明星的照片（现代农村审美偏爱 "比基尼照片"，通常是西方女性的照片）。比消费文化的地位象征更重要的是商业文化的技能，其传播速度比消费文化更慢。在一些地方，特别是在广东和浙江的郊区，这些影响正在模糊第三世界中国和新兴工业化中国之间的界限。农民工的汇款有助于资助乡镇企业，返乡农民工带来的知识和人脉可以使这些企业取得成功。然而，如上所述，在第三世界中国的许多其他地区，特别是更远的内陆地区，乡镇企业正在崩溃，而农村工业化正在倒退。

只要农民工在城市中没有充分的居住权，社会制度之间的基本界限在大多数地方就会保留。事实上，新兴工业化中国的成功，以及从中获利最多的投资者的利益，都取决于它与第三世界中国的差异。正是这种差异确保了廉价和温顺的劳动力的持续供应，这对出口导向的发展非常重要。这种温顺来自于这样一个事实：在新兴工业化体系中的悲惨工作可以在第三世界体系中带来相对的地位和声望，而且第三世界体系中根深蒂固的当局--父母、宗族领袖、地方老板--都有兴趣对进城的工人进行约束。虽然在农村有很多针对地方权力者的动乱，但在新兴工业化中国的出口型飞地，几乎没有公开的劳工动乱，尽管这个系统的劳工的生活条件比社会主义中国的国有企业的工人差得多。

###	不安的平衡

第三世界的中国、社会主义的中国和新兴工业化的中国之间的不稳定平衡至今仍保持着，因为在这些体系中，几乎每个人都可以通过至少暂时跨越国界到另一个体系中去，希望在生活中得到一些改善。未就业的农民可以通过迁移到城市来提高他们的收入；而他们通过回到农村的家中炫耀他们的新钱和城市的先进性来缓解他们在城市的低下地位。城市官僚机构和国有企业中收入微薄的官员可以通过将投资引入新的工业化体系而将他们的权力转化为金钱；他们可以通过依靠社会主义中国的政治体制来保护自己免受残酷的资本主义竞争的影响。

在目前的安排下，最大的输家是国有企业系统中的中年工人，他们失去了生计，但缺乏找到新工作的必要技能。然而，即使是他们，也并非完全没有希望。至少有时候，他们可以通过家庭成员与社会上更有活力的部门建立联系。许多城市家庭实行 "一个家庭，两个系统"。也就是说，配偶之一在国有部门工作（并充分利用那里仍然存在的任何住房和医疗保健权利），而另一配偶或儿子或女儿在新的工业化部门工作 -- 不是在低工资部门，而是在相对高薪的白领部门。这样一来，子女的配偶就可以弥补另一配偶损失的工资和养老金福利。随着中国从一个用损失成本的半熟练劳动力制造商品的国家过渡到高科技产品的制造商，在新的工业化部门找到工作的人将来自今天陷入困境的国有企业的工人家庭。然而，一户两制的解决方案在很多情况下可能行不通，因为政府在城市中成功地执行了独生子女政策。一个成年的单身人士必须同时照顾他或她自己的父母和公婆。再加上日益增长的离婚率，这意味着城市家庭成员将发现更难补偿一些成员在变化的经济体系中面临的损失。

至少在不久的将来，中国社会中最不稳定的部分可能是城市工人阶级，他们因为国有企业的内爆而愤怒和绝望。到目前为止，城市工人阶级还没有形成足够的团结来推翻现状。由于国有企业工作单位的性质，它的内部是分裂的。通过为工人提供一揽子服务，并限制工人横向流动到其他企业，这些工作单位使工人无法养成与其他工厂或工业部门的同行建立联系的习惯。此外，正如我们所指出的，城市无产阶级并不倾向于与从中国农村迁移过来的劳动者建立联系，他们对一般的农民也没有什么同情心。中国政府对那些可能消除不满情绪的团体极为敏感。它粉碎了任何组建自治工会的企图。中国政府大力迫害法轮功和类似的宗教团体，可能是因为担心这些团体有能力建立起跨地区和跨社会阶层的联系。尽管如此，工人们似乎已经开始与中国各地的受害同行建立联系。现政权的稳定将取决于他们的成功程度。
 
### 后果

因此，今天的中国是由至少三个不同的社会系统组成的不稳定的共管区。目前，将它们联系在一起的是没有协同作用的依赖关系--在这种情况下，维持剥削系统内最弱者的现状，符合每个系统中最有权势的人的利益。这种情况非常复杂，而且可能非常不稳定，没有办法准确预测其未来。

为了把这个由复杂部分组成的脆弱统一体维系在一起，中国共产党先是在实践中，现在又在理论上重新塑造了自己，成为一个企业主义的政党，也就是说，一个所谓代表社会各阶层利益并调和相互竞争的利益的政党。 江泽民的 "三个代表 "理论在党的十六大上被定为正式的党的理论，指出党代表中国社会的先进进步力量，包括现在有资格正式成为党员的工商企业主。如果要象征性地表示这一点，锤子和镰刀可能要叠加在股票组合的上面这些利益--在经典的马克思主义理论中根本不相容--如何调和？江泽民的理论主要是一些空洞的口号，没有给出一致的答案。然而，在实践中，这些利益正在通过世袭制国家的动力得到调和。精英们没有通过可执行的官僚规则与大众结合，而是通过个人的、客户式的关系网将他们彼此联系起来。他们的主要共同点是对维持党的垄断统治的兴趣。

这样的公司主义政党与世袭制国家结合在一起，可以长期保持合理程度的社会稳定和经济发展--一个很好的例子是墨西哥的制度革命党，它统治了墨西哥七十一年。然而，这种政治安排的一个特有的问题是腐败。通过名义上代表不同利益的精英们之间的个人谈判，不规范的行为被纳入维持和平的过程中。党对权力的垄断进一步增加了这种诱惑。强烈的民族主义意识可能会在党内人员中暂时保持一定程度的廉洁。但是，现代犯罪集团--走私犯、毒品贩子和洗钱者--所提供的轻松赚钱的诱惑，很快就深深地破坏了这种精英阶层的诚信和凝聚力，也加深了公民对政府的愤怒和嘲讽。公民对这种腐败的厌恶导致了墨西哥的 PRI 和台湾的国民党的和平消亡，它们被投票箱扫地出门。同样的情况会不会发生在中国的中共身上呢？

在上述案例中，腐败的党组织的和平消亡首先需要建立正式的民主选举程序，尽管执政党经常利用其权力来颠覆正式的规则。中国政府现在开始为农村一级的自由选举制定这样的规则，尽管如我们所见，这些规则经常被破坏，以便党能够保持其统治地位。虽然没有迹象表明这种情况会在不久的将来发生，但我们可以想象这样一种情况：为了拉拢不满的公民，政府允许在更高层次上进行这种选举。即使它这样做了，该党仍然可能保留所有有效的权力杠杆。最终能够打破这种权力的是，在那些与持续的腐败没有利害关系，并且有能力利用正式规则以和平方式追求其利益的社会阶层中，活跃的公民社会的发展。

我们只能猜测这样一个活跃的公民社会是如何以及何时出现的。最有可能的来源是本章开头所述的新兴中产阶级。现在有数百万人从事新兴私营部门的技术、管理和公共关系工作。他们有一种可以凭借自己的才能出人头地的感觉，善于使用互联网等新的交流方式，习惯于在自由选择消费品的基础上构建身份，能够在非政治性的横向关系基础上与志同道合的同伴互动，在不断扩大的私人领域中蓬勃发展，这些公民开始发展一系列非政治性的自由协会，致力于自我帮助、教育和慈善事业。戴博拉-戴维斯认为，我们不应低估 "在非官方活动中增加社会性的能力，以孵化忠诚，最终产生能够削弱或推翻独裁国家的行动"。

但这样一个公民社会的基础只在新兴工业化中国的一个相对小的部分。它可能需要几十年的时间才能蓬勃发展，以至于能够产生对当前专制统治的替代。即便如此，也要以中国保持稳定并继续保持稳定的经济增长为前提。

那么，我用 "一国三制 "来描述的矛盾力量的不稳定平衡，本质上是不稳定的。它的演变可能不是按照某种可预测的辩证法，而是按照混沌理论的突发事件来进行的，其中一个领域的小变化会不可预测地导致另一个领域的大变化。在这样一个不确定的情况下，领导层的质量会产生很大的影响，这就是为什么党的十六大上的决定可能是如此重要。
